Abstract
As a platform of social media with high activity, Twitter has seen the discussion of many hot topics related to the COVID-19 pandemic. One such is the COVID-19 vaccination program, which has skeptics in several religious, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups, and Indonesia has one of the largest populations of various ethnicities and religions of countries worldwide. Diverse opinions based on skepticism about the effectiveness of vaccines can increase the number of people who refuse or delay vaccine acceptance. Therefore, it is important to analyze and monitor stances and public opinions on social media, especially on vaccine topics, as part of the long-term solution to the COVID-19 pandemic. This study presents the Indonesian COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets data set that contains stance and aspect-based sentiment information. The data were collected monthly from January to October 2021 using specific keywords. There are nine thousand tweets manually annotated by three independent analysts. We annotated each tweet with three labels of stance and seven predetermined aspects related to Indonesian COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets: services, implementation, apps, costs, participants, vaccine products, and general. The dataset is useful for many research purposes, including stance detection, aspect-based sentiment analysis, topic detection, and public opinion analysis on Twitter, especially on the policies regarding the prevention of pandemics.


Value of the Data
These data are valuable for monitoring and analyzing public opinion on Twitter related to the COVID-19 vaccination program during Indonesia's first ten months of the vaccination program, which is helpful as a guide in the development of policies.•From the general COVID-19 vaccination-related tweets, we provided samples of 9,000 tweets that experts labeled with stance and aspect-based sentiment information. Our dataset provides insights into diverse aspects of the COVID-19 vaccination program, making it possible to provide more accurate sentiment information.•These data concern the opinion of Indonesians toward COVID-19 vaccination and serve as literature for public authorities to detect Indonesian sentiment toward the COVID-19 vaccination policies, which have some skeptics in several social groups. Moreover, these data can be used for many research purposes, including stance detection and aspect-based sentiment analysis, especially public opinion analysis on Twitter.•This data can help the research community develop state-of-the-art models for stance detection on tweets, especially Indonesian opinion. Moreover, there may be another pandemic with vaccination policies, so the data can be compared and referenced for developing models.


Objective
The dataset was collected and processed to further increase our understanding of how sentiment and contextual information impact the performance of stance detection on Twitter text (tweet), which is a short text with slight information. The data in Indonesian language since Indonesian Twitter users are among the active ones especially during pandemic. This data is not only for validating sentiment and contextual information for stance detection but can also be used for public opinion analysis of vaccination programs that tend to have pros and cons opinion. This dataset adds value aspect-based sentiment information as sub-topics for more accurate sentiment information at the aspect level on tweets, which possibly contains multiple issues discussed. Network features based on interaction relationships were provided for generated user community knowledge. Other researchers may use this data for aspect-based sentiment analysis on tweets to help identify sentiment more accurately, especially on short text.


Data Description
There were three data files in our dataset and readme file. All raw data (filtered and unfiltered list of tweets used in this study) are available in the repository Mendeley Data.
Data identification number: 10.17632/7ky2jbjwtn.3
Direct URL to data: https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/7ky2jbjwtn/3 ◦	a.initial data (Indo_vaccination_raw.csv)
The Initial dataset is a raw data that obtained from the data collection process using Twitter API services. This study collected 2,400,414 Indonesian COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets as the initial dataset (Indo_vaccination_raw.csv) during the first ten months of the COVID-19 vaccination program in Indonesia, from January to October 2021. This raw data contains unfiltered list of tweets used in this study. ◦	b.cleaned data (Indo_vaccination_cleaned.csv)
Meanwhile, the cleaned dataset was obtained from the data cleaning and preprocessing. Then the raw dataset was cleaned to remove the irrelevant data, including spam, non-Bahasa (Indonesian language), and non-target related (COVID-19 vaccine) tweets. The duplicated tweets were categorized as spam and removed. Moreover, the data was filtered from a tweet by the government account to represent public opinion without any specific purpose. Finally, 248,604 tweets (representing 10% of the initial dataset) posted by 140,761 unique users on Twitter were cleaned as a raw dataset (Indo_vaccination_cleaned.csv). ◦	c.labeled data (Indo_vaccination_labeled.csv) dataset

From the cleaned dataset, we conducted data sampling for generated labeled dataset as ground truth, which will be called labeled data. We provided data labeled (Indo_vaccination_labeled.csv), collected from the raw dataset, and annotated each tweet with two labeling tasks: stance and aspect-based sentiment. Three independent analysts annotated the sample data with a majority voting strategy for the final label. The labeled data comprised 9,030 tweets posted from 7,313 unique users. The labeled dataset contains six columns (id, user_id, community, aspect_category, aspect_sentiment, stance). All the columns, except community, aspect_category, aspect_sentiment, and stance, are collected using Twitter API services. Meanwhile, the initial and cleaned dataset only contains two columns (id and user_id). Table 1 shows the definition of each column of labeled data.

Due to Twitter's content redistribution policies [[1]], we only shared Tweet IDs, user IDs, the user community, and the annotation label. Moreover, it also gives users further freedom to use the data. Therefore, researchers should collect the tweets using Twitter API to provide the information needed. Using Louvain modularity, we also provided user community knowledge (column community) extracted from user interaction networks [[2]]. The interaction network was formed based on mentions and retweet relationships to represent user behavior and agreement. This network can provide contextual information for stance detection tasks [[3]]. We extracted the data from 1,645 communities, with 88% being communities with less than three members (1,434 communities). The larger communities can number 281 users. Section 2.3 discusses a detailed explanation of user community detection.
The labeled dataset annotations classify three predefined labels of stance [[4]], including favor containing 3,753 tweets, neutral with 3,299 tweets, and against with 1,978 tweets. Moreover, each tweet is annotated into seven predetermined categories of aspects concerning the target that represent challenges and issues of the COVID-19 vaccination program [[5]], including services, implementation, apps, costs, participants, vaccine products, and general. Each tweet can have a multiple-aspect category, with each aspect category having two possible sentiment values: positive and negative. Section 2 explains the details of data labeling, and Table 2 displays the distribution of each class label column. Each aspect category will have two possible sentiment values: positive and negative. Aspect general is the most label in our labeled dataset.

To provide more detailed information on our data, we visualized each stance category using word clouds in Fig. 1. We obtained these word clouds from the cleaned text after data preprocessing, including normalization, lemmatization, and stopword removal. A detailed explanation of data cleaning and preprocessing is discussed in Section 2. Fig. 1 shows that each category of stance category label has a different characteristic based on word frequency. For example, the high occurrence of the word ayo (come on) in the favor class indicates an invitation to vaccinate, representing support for the COVID-19 vaccination program. Meanwhile, the against class contains several words that express opposition to the COVID-19 vaccination program, including the words tolak (reject) and ditolak (rejected). Moreover, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was the phrase with the highest frequency because of the refusal to do the PCR test even though vaccinated. On the other hand, the neutral class tends to contain words that represent the category aspect, including pelaksanaan (implementation), aplikasi (application), and usia (age). It indicates that the neutral class tends not to support or oppose the topic but to ask about an aspect or issue. This is supported by the high number of question marks used in the neutral class tweets. Conversely, Table 2 shows that stance and sentiment have orthogonal relationships because negative opinion is not always against the target and vice versa.

Fig. 2 visualizes the monthly counts of tweets on our labeled dataset. Fig. 2 shows fluctuations, especially between January and June, because several events attract public attention, such as mandatory vaccines for certain administrative requirements in Indonesia. Moreover, the favor class dominates every month compared to other classes. We believe this dataset is valuable for many research purposes, especially public opinion analysis on Twitter, including stance detection, aspect-based sentiment analysis, and social network analysis. On the other hand, there is skepticism regarding vaccines in several social groups [[6]], which makes it interesting to use as a case study, especially in Indonesia, which has ethnic and religious diversity [[7]]. Therefore, a public opinion analysis on COVID-19 vaccination is needed as public health surveillance to prevent rejection and increase public acceptance of the COVID-19 vaccine.


Experimental Design, Materials and Methods
3.1 Data Collection and Preprocessing
The data were collected using Twitter API 1 on Python with specific keywords: vaksin (vaccines) and vaksinasi (vaccination). The tweets used are Indonesian tweets posted between January and October 2021, Indonesia's first period of COVID-19 vaccination. We collected a maximum of 250,000 sample tweets each month to overcome the limitations of Twitter API services. This process collects the text of a tweet and other related information, including Twitter metrics and user metadata. There were 2,400,414 Indonesian COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets from 576,488 Twitter users (Indo_vaccination_raw.csv) as the initial dataset. The study selected Indonesian tweets based on the attribute language “in” on Twitter API services. However, we found a lot of irrelevant data, including non-Bahasa (Indonesian language), non-COVID-19 vaccine-related, and spam tweets, so we conducted data preprocessing and cleaning to remove the irrelevant data for the cleaned dataset.
The first step in data preprocessing was case folding to map the text to lowercase format. The irrelevant Twitter attributes were removed, including user mentions, hashtags, numbers, symbols, and emojis. The text of tweets generally contains slang words. Therefore, text normalization was carried out based on the Indonesian slang corpus 2. Further data preprocessing includes lemmatization using NLP-ID 3 and removing the stopwords using Sastrawi 4. After the data preprocessing was complete, data cleaning was carried out, thus removing the irrelevant data (such as non-Bahasa, non-COVID-19 vaccine-related, and spam tweets). We found that in our initial dataset, there are many Malaysian tweets, even though it has been selected based on the Twitter attribute. Therefore, we filtered non-Bahasa (Malaysian tweets) and non-COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets based on the collected keywords.
Moreover, we removed a tweet posted by the government to prevent bias in data; the government tends to support the COVID-19 vaccination policy and continuously posted duplicate tweets to exaggerate information (spam tweets). We also only used accounts over 12 months since November 2021 because there is a possibility that a new Twitter account is a spammer. Finally, we obtained the cleaned dataset of 248,604 posts from 140,761 users (Indo_vaccination_cleaned.csv), representing 10% of the initial dataset (Indo_vaccination_raw.csv). Fig. 3 describes our methodology for data collection and preprocessing.

3.2 Data Labeling
After obtaining the cleaned dataset, we conducted data sampling for labeling as ground truth. Data sampling was conducted based on keywords collected manually, representing each stance class. The sample data includes 9,030 manually selected tweets from the cleaned dataset (Indo_vaccination_labeled.csv), which were identified by two labeling tasks: stance and aspect-based sentiment labels. Three independent analysts—two researchers in natural language processing (one MSc-level and one BSc-level) and one communication science expert (BSc-level)—labeled the data manually and used the majority voting strategy for the final class label. We only used unique tweets to provide reliable labeled data and did not consider the retweets. This study applied data labeling using LabelStudio 5. For stance labeling, each tweet was annotated into three classes: favor, against, and neutral. The tweet was given an favor or against label if the opinion supported or opposed the target. The tweet was labeled neutral if the opinion was neither of these two cases or the statement about the target was inconclusive.
The study annotated each tweet into six predetermined aspects for the aspect-based sentiment labeling, including services, implementation, apps, costs, participants, and vaccine products. These predetermined aspects represent the challenges and issues of the COVID-19 vaccination program on Twitter [[5],[6]], and particularly in Indonesia [[8]]. In addition, the vaccine product influences the acceptance of the COVID-19 vaccine in Indonesia [[9]]. However, there is a possibility that the user expresses an opinion without stating any of the predetermined aspects [[10]]. Therefore, this opinion was categorized as a general aspect. In total, we used seven aspects. Each aspect has two possible sentiment values, positive or negative, for simple binary polarities. There is a possibility that COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets may contain more than one aspect or subtopic, discussed with different sentiments. If a tweet had multi-aspects, the sentiments of the aspects were categorized into one-sentiment information. Therefore, if a tweet has different sentiments between aspects, its sentiment label is conflict. Table 3 illustrates the mechanism to determine the sentiment label of tweets. In Ex. (1) in Table 3, the analyst labeled a tweet with three aspects (multi-aspect) with positive sentiments that dominate among aspects. Therefore, the sentiment is positive by voting the sentiment label on the tweet. Unlike Ex. (2) in Table 3, aspects' sentiments differ. Therefore, the sentiment is categorized as conflict.
We applied the majority voting strategy to the final label of the tweet. Thus, if each analyst's notation differs, the tweet is marked as class invalid. Table 4 shows an example of our majority voting strategy. In Ex. (1) in Table 4, the final label voted is cost because two analysts labeled it as cost. Unlike Ex. (2) in Table 4, the analysts' labels differed. Therefore, they categorized the final label as invalid. This approach also applied to the vote of the stance category label. We calculated Cohen's kappa coefficient for stance and aspect-based sentiment labels to evaluate the agreement between analysts. We obtained a moderate consensus among the analysts, with Cohen's kappa coefficients of 0.6517 for the stance and Krippendorff's Alpha of 0.5187 for the aspect-based sentiment label. This was necessary because the analysts have different points of view, especially regarding the positive and neutral classes, which tend to be challenging to identify. In aspect-based sentiment labeling, the analysts categorized the aspects discussed differently due to the lack of context in the text of the tweet.

3.3 Community Detection
Since network features can be contextual information for detecting peoples' stances [[3]], we also provided user community knowledge. Twitter network features can be divided into three categories based on how to formulate, including preference, interaction, and connection networks [[4]]. This study used an interaction network based on mention and retweet relationships. This process is performed on the cleaned data to represent the user network better. First, we extracted the mentioned relationship based on the prefix "@." At the same time, the term "RT" at the beginning of a tweet extracted the retweet relationship. The combined labeled data contains 4,755 retweets and 9,247 mentions of relationships. Then the combined relations implemented community detection using the Louvain modularity algorithm.
We implemented Louvain modularity using networkX 6 with default parameters. There were communities of 3,648 that contained edges of 9,840 (representing relationships) and nodes of 10,299 (representing Twitter users). We only used users that posted in our labeled data. However, some communities have a small number of members. Therefore, we based our selection on the minimum number of community members threshold. In this study, we used three users as the threshold of community members because 96.5% of the community has less than three members. There are 130 (representing 3.5%) of the communities that are valid (with at least three members) in the labeled data. Fig. 4 shows the comparisons of communities detected on labeled data. To demonstrate the community extracted, we visualize the graphs of the five largest communities by the number of members in Fig. 5. There are 55% communities do not have member on our labeled data. Meanwhile, 45.5% communities only have one or two members on a community.

Based on Fig. 5, there are five communities with a large number of members. Based on the class label, communities two and five classify favor and neutral, while community four classify favor and against COVID-19 vaccination. Meanwhile, community one tends to be favor, and community three tends to be against COVID-19 vaccination. No particular aspects were discussed in the community, except for community one regarding vaccines and community five regarding application aspects. It indicates that community information is not always related to the same issues or discussed aspects. Community ‘B’ and ‘E’ tend to be class Favor and Neutral, while community ‘D’ tends to be class Favor and Against COVID-19 Vaccination. Meanwhile, community ‘A’ tends to be class Favor and community ‘C’ tends to be against COVID-19 vaccination.

3.4 Preliminary Experiment
We also evaluated our data using classification models to demonstrate the potential and quality of our data set for the stance detection task. We applied five machine learning and four sequential-based deep learning models. Five machine-learning models, including Naïve Bayes (NB), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Random Forest (RF), were implemented using sklearn 7 with default parameters. Meanwhile, four deep learning models, including Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Bidirectional GRU (BiGRU), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM), were applied using Keras 8 and adopted modest neural network architecture [[11]]. In our experiment, we used tweets' text opinions, aspect-based sentiment information, and user community knowledge as features for stance detection. We used cleaned text, the result from the previous section (Section 2.1), then used TF-IDF for machine learning and a word-embedding model for deep learning as vector representation. Aspect-based sentiment information, including aspect category and aspect sentiment, was labeled (Section 2.2) and decomposed using a binary relevance approach.
The study applied Word2Vec as a word-embedding model as text representations for machine learning and deep learning models. We used pre-trained word embeddings that trained on 467,000 documents of Indonesian Wikipedia for 300-dimensional word representation. Each model was evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation to use 80% for learning and 20% of labeled data for testing the model. The result shows that RF with TF-IDF as a text representation outperformed other classifiers with an average accuracy of 58.1% and a Macro F1 score of 57.1%, as shown in Table 5. Meanwhile, BiLSTM obtained the best performance of deep learning models with an average accuracy of 57.3% and a Macro F1 score of 55.9%. However, the result shows that deep learning models consistently perform well.

3.5 Discussion
There are nine classifiers implemented as the preliminary experiment of our labeled dataset. The result is provided in Table 5 and shows that our dataset is adequate for stance detection modeling, especially in a low-resource language like Indonesian. Surprisingly, Random Forest with TF-IDF as text representation based on term frequency obtained a better result on all evaluation metrics than deep learning models. The BiLSTM achieved the next best performance with Word2Vec as text representation with an accuracy of 57.3%. Moreover, deep learning tends to be more consistent than machine learning, in which only two models obtain more than 55% accuracy. However, the features used are still modest and do not adequately represent the stance. Stance detection performs well if it uses several features, such as linguistics, social interaction, and user identity [[3],[4]].
On the other hand, a tweet is a short text and lacks contextual information. Therefore, features representing contextual information are necessary to improve the stance detection performance. Despite using general-purpose classification methods rather than state-of-the-art stance detection models, all models could classify the tweets with acceptable performance. For further study, researchers can use our dataset for public opinion analysis to understand the public stance and sentiment during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially in Indonesia.


Ethics Statements
Our data were collected, scraped, and distributed under the Twitter developer policy 2022 and followed its regulations [[1]]. Data from Twitter could be used with care for the Privacy and Control of Twitter users. In the discussion, we processed the data and did not mention the privacy information to protect Twitter users and ensure anonymity.


CrediT authorship contribution statement
Diana Purwitasari: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing, Project administration. Cornelius Bagus Purnama Putra: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft, Data curation, Investigation. Agus Budi Raharjo: Writing – review & editing.


Data availability
Indonesian COVID-19 Vaccination-related Tweets for Stance Detection and Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Indonesian Ministry of Research and Technology under Grant No. 084/E5/PG.02.00.PT/2022 with an institutional contract No. 1440/PKS/ITS/2022.














