Dataset of prostate MRI annotated for anatomical zones and cancer


Lisa C. Adams, Marcus R. Makowski, Günther Engel ,
Maximilian Rattunde, Felix Busch, Patrick Asbach,
Stefan M. Niehues , Shankeeth Vinayahalingam, Bram van
Ginneken, Geert Litjens, Keno K. Bressem,


Abstract

In the present work, we present a publicly available, expertsegmented representative dataset of 158 3.0 Tesla biparametric MRIs [1]. There is an increasing number of studies investigating prostate and prostate carcinoma segmentation using
deep learning (DL) with 3D architectures [2–7]. The development of robust and data-driven DL models for prostate segmentation and assessment is currently limited by the availability of openly available expert-annotated datasets [8–10].
The dataset contains 3.0 Tesla MRI images of the prostate
of patients with suspected prostate cancer. Patients over 50
years of age who had a 3.0 Tesla MRI scan of the prostate
that met PI-RADS version 2.1 technical standards were included. All patients received a subsequent biopsy or surgery so that the MRI diagnosis could be veriﬁed/matched with the
histopathologic diagnosis. For patients who had undergone
multiple MRIs, the last MRI, which was less than six months
before biopsy/surgery, was included. All patients were examined at a German university hospital (Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin) between 02/2016 and 01/2020. All MRI
were acquired with two 3.0 Tesla MRI scanners (Siemens
VIDA and Skyra, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany).
Axial T2W sequences and axial diffusion-weighted sequences
(DWI) with apparent diffusion coeﬃcient maps (ADC) were
included in the data set.
T2W sequences and ADC maps were annotated by two
board-certiﬁed radiologists with 6 and 8 years of experience,
respectively. For T2W sequences, the central gland (central
zone and transitional zone) and peripheral zone were segmented. If areas of suspected prostate cancer (PIRADS score
of ≥ 4) were identiﬁed on examination, they were segmented
in both the T2W sequences and ADC maps.
Because restricted diffusion is best seen in DWI images with
high b-values, only these images were selected and all images with low b-values were discarded. Data were then
anonymized and converted to NIfTI (Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative) format.


This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)



Value of the Data
• Expert annotated MRI datasets of conﬁrmed prostate cancer are rare [8,12,13], but are needed
to develop suﬃcient deep learning algorithms to assist radiologists and urologists in the detection and treatment of prostate cancer.
• This dataset provides segmentations from experts in urologic radiology which were extensively reviewed to ensure high quality segmentations. Researchers in computer vision, who
do not have access to medical data and/or radiologic expertise, can therefore use it to develop new algorithms for prostate cancer detection.
• The dataset can serve either as a training dataset for developing new algorithms or as a test
set for trained algorithms to check their performance and generalizability.
• Part of the dataset remains as a hidden test dataset to be able to check the performance of
the trained algorithms on https://prostate158.grand-challenge.org. Researchers can compare
trained algorithms under realistic conditions. As the test set remains hidden, overﬁtting on
test data is not possible.

1. Objective
The development of robust computational models for prostate imaging is limited by the availability of high-quality datasets for prostate cancer (PCa) and zonal anatomy. Many deep learning papers published in the last years were based on the same open-source patient data from
the widely known PROSTATEx challenge dataset, while most studies used non-publicly available single-center datasets. The limited data availability is accompanied by limited availabilitybof open source code. To increase the availability of open data and code for prostate and PCa
segmentation, we here provide a comparatively large, publicly available, expert-segmented representative dataset of 158 3T bpMRIs that overall conforms to PI-RADSTM v2.1 guidelines, along
with an open-source baseline U-Net algorithm.

2. Data Description
The dataset consists of 158 3.0 Tesla MRIs from patients with suspected prostate cancer annotated by two board-certiﬁed radiologists. Inclusion criteria for patients were a minimum age
over 50 years, an MRI examination with a biparametric imaging protocol meeting PI-RADS v2
technical standards, a subsequent biopsy or surgery, and an available pathology report conﬁrming a diagnosis of prostate cancer. In patients with multiple MRIs, the last examination
which was less than six months before pathology was considered. All examinations were performed at a German university hospital (Charité University Hospital Berlin) between 02/2016 and
01/2020. [11]

2.1. Structure of the data archive
Folder:
Prostate158_train:
→ train
→ 020
adc.nii.gz # ADC sequence in NIfTI format
adc_tumor_reader1.nii.gz # Tumor segmentation of reader 1
adc_tumor_reader2.nii.gz # Tumor segmentation of reader 2
dwi.nii.gz # DWI sequence in NIfTI format
t2.nii.gz # T2W sequence in NIfTI format
t2_anatomy_reader1.nii.gz # Anatomy segmentation of reader 1
t2_tumor_reader1.nii.gz # Tumor segmentation of reader 1

→ 021
…
→ 158
train.csv # ﬁle names with relative paths to be used for training valid.csv # ﬁle names with
relative paths to be used for model validation during training
All examinations in the dataset are in axial plane and resampled to the same pixel-spacing
and orientation, as well as center-cropped for easier handling. Therefore, the resolution of the
original sequences, as given in the below table, is not preserved. Example slices for all sequences
with corresponding annotations are provided by Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Example axial slices of resampled sequences in the Prostate158 dataset with expert annotations for anatomical
zones and tumor zones.

3. Experimental Design, Materials and Methods
3.1. Image acquisition and extraction
The data set consists of 158 MRI examinations, all performed on Siemens VIDA and Skyra
(Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) clinical 3.0-T scanners according to an acquisition
protocol that meets current guidelines and using B1 shimming.

The ADC map was calculated from b-values ranging from 100 to 10 0 0 s/mm³, using the software pre-installed on the MRI scanner (version VE11A).
Images were then extracted from the PACS and converted to NIfTI (Neuroimaging Informatics
Technology Initiative) format for further processing.



3.2. Pixel-wise segmentations of anatomical zones and tumor zones
All pixel-wise segmentations were performed with the open-source software ITK-Snap (version 3.8.0; www.itksnap.org). One board-certiﬁed radiologist with 6 years of experience segmented the central gland (central zone and transitional zone) and the peripheral zone. Images
were then reviewed by a second board-certiﬁed radiologist with 8 years of experience.
For prostate carcinoma, both radiologists created independent segmentations of suspected tumor zones. Only lesions with PI-RADS scores of 4 or 5 were included. After a four-week interval,
all segmentations were again assessed by the radiologists.
Anatomical zones were segmented in the T2w sequences. Segmentation of PCa lesions was
performed in the ADC map and then adjusted in case of over- or underestimation of the tumor
extent. This was achieved by creating an overlay of the ADC segmentation mask on T2w and
DWI to account for anatomical details and localization of restricted diffusion. Additional segmentations of PCa lesions for T2-weighted images were only performed by reader 1. Segmentations
for anatomical zones and tumor zones were saved in different ﬁles, each in NIfTI format.

3.3. MRI pre-processing
All MRIs were pre-processed using intensity resampling, and centre cropping. In addition, a
non-parametric, non-uniform intensity normalization was performed for T2w images to remove
distortion ﬁelds using the N4ITK algorithm (13). For DWI, only images with the highest b-value
(10 0 0) were extracted and the remaining images were discarded.

3.4. Resampling
Although the sequences were acquired on the same patient, the FOV, resolution and spacing
of the sequences differ. Since each sequence is also manually planned, the orientation of the sequences of a single examination may also be different. For this reason, identical coordinates in
the sequences of the same examination do not correspond to the same anatomical region. Therefore, all examinations were resampled so that (1) the size and resolution were identical and (2)
the voxel coordinates in different sequences of an MRI corresponded to the same anatomical
region. Resampling was performed using SimpleITK 2.0 with the following command:

import SimpleITK as sitk
reference = sitk.ReadImage(‘‘path/to/reference’’)
target = sitk.ReadImage(‘‘path/to/target’’)
resampled = sitk.Resample(target, reference)
The T2w sequence was used as reference for all other examinations. For the segmentation
mask, the mode for interpolations was set as SimpleITK.sitkNearestNeighbor; for images, the
mode was SimpleITK.sitkLinear


3.5. Cropping
Prostate MRIs always contain a large part of the pelvis, which is irrelevant for prostate zone
segmentation or prostate cancer detection. Because the prostate is reliably located in the center
of the examination, images were centered by removing 25% of the image margins along the
anterior-posterior and lateral-medial axes.

After cropping, the images were saved in NIfTI format. Fig. 2 provides a visual overview of
the preprocessing steps.


Fig. 2. Overview of preprocessing steps taken.

Ethics Statements
All contributions to this study were approved by the Institutional Review Board (EA4/062/20),
including a waiver of informed consent, and performed in accordance with data protection policy. All research has been carried out in accordance with The Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki).

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

Data Availability
Prostate158 - Training data (Original data) (Zenodo).


CRediT Author Statement
Lisa C. Adams: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Writing – original draft; Marcus R. Makowski: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Resources, Writing – review & editing; Günther Engel: Methodology, Investigation; Maximilian Rattunde:
Writing – review & editing; Felix Busch: Writing – review & editing; Patrick Asbach: Writing – review & editing; Stefan M. Niehues: Writing – review & editing, Resources; Shankeeth
Vinayahalingam: Writing – review & editing, Methodology; Bram van Ginneken: Writing – review & editing, Methodology; Geert Litjens: Writing – review & editing, Methodology; Keno K.
Bressem: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original
draft.

Acknowledgments
LCA is grateful for her participation in the BIH Charité Junior Clinician and Clinician Scientist
Program and KKB is grateful for his participation in the BIH Charité Digital Clinician Scientist
Program all funded by the Charité — Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the Berlin Institute of Health,
and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. We also thank the BIH for providing access to their
HPC for Research cluster for our analysis.
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Open Access Publication Fund of Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and the German Research Foundation (DFG).
