Human-annotated dataset for social media
sentiment analysis for Albanian language

Fatbardh Kadriu, Doruntina Murtezaj, Fatbardh Gashi, Lule Ahmedi, Arianit Kurti, Zenun Kastrati


University of Prishtina, Prishtina 10000, Kosovo
Linnaeus University, Växjö 351 95, Sweden

Abstract: Social media was a heavily used platform by people in different countries to express their opinions about different crises,
especially during the Covid-19 pandemics. This dataset is created through collecting people’s comments in the news items
on the oﬃcial Facebook site of the National Institute of Public Health of Kosovo. The dataset contains a total of 10,132
comments that are human-annotated in the Albanian language as a low-resource language. The dataset was collected
from March 12, 2020, and this coincides with the emergence
of the ﬁrst conﬁrmed Covid-19 case in Kosovo until August
31, 2020, when the second wave started. Due to the scarcity
of labeled data for low-resource languages, the dataset can
be used by the research community in the ﬁeld of machine
learning, information retrieval, affective computing, as well
as by the public agencies and decision makers.


Value of the Data:
This dataset is useful for the research community for two reasons: (1) it is a dataset for sentiment analysis of social media comments in Albanian language that would push forward the
research in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis for low-resource languages; (2) this dataset could
serve as a standard benchmark for testing performance of the existing and new machine
learning methods and techniques as it is curated and human annotated. By sharing the data,
we also increase the transparency and research utilization through enabling the reproduction
of the results [1].
The research community in the ﬁelds of machine learning, information retrieval, affective computing, education can beneﬁt from these data by using them in various research
tasks such as: (multilingual) sentiment analysis, opinion mining, performance analysis of
deep/machine learning models and techniques. By making these data open we join the global
movement that is not only advancing science and scientiﬁc communication but also transforming modern society and how decisions are made [2].
Another possible value of these data is that they could be used by public agencies and decision makers to prevent the distribution of fake news in social media during crisis situations
such as the current Covid-19 pandemics. This becomes especially important in the emerging
economies where the scientiﬁc infrastructure is not very developed [3]. Thus, these kinds of
curated scientiﬁc datasets can contribute to policy making as well.

1. Data Description
Research on social media sentiment analysis for the English language has achieved signiﬁcant results already [4–6], considered as critical for different online social platforms and natural languages towards identifying online discourse, like are reactions from different cultures to
the Coronavirus actions taken by different countries. Work on other languages concerning social media sentiment analysis is also growing, such as on German [7], Swedish [8], Urdu [9] or
multilingual social media posts [10].
On the other hand, sentiment analysis for the Albanian language stands behind even some
other low resource languages, with only few works on sentiment analysis (opinion mining)
[11,12], emotion detection [13] and hate speech [14]. As deﬁciency of an Albanian language
larger corpus of data is what these works characterize, being a prerequisite to develop a highperformance sentiment classiﬁer for opinion mining, the dataset presented in this article aims
to exactly address that low resource drawback typical for low-resource languages. Only a very
recent study [14] has contributed with the so-called Shaj dataset, an annotated Albanian dataset
of size range similar to our dataset, with 11874 comments from various social media platforms,
but annotated for hate and offensive speech.
The Dataset presented in this article comprises comments collected from the oﬃcial Facebook
page of the NIPHK Institute for a period of 6 months, from March 12 till August 31, 2020. On
March 12, the ﬁrst case of Covid-19 was conﬁrmed in Kosovo. Comments were in Albanian language and are retrieved using a tool called Comment Exporter1 . This work aims to identify and
extract the opinions and attitudes of Kosovo citizens expressed on Facebook about the Covid19 pandemics by manually annotating comments according to their sentiment, such as positive,
negative, and neutral. This dataset is anonymized according to the Facebook Platform Policy for
Developers [15] and contains a total of 10,132 comments along with 12 attributes. The names
of all attributes of the dataset and their respective descriptions are presented in Table 1. The
data discussed in this article are related to the research article entitled “A Deep Learning Sentiment Analyser for Social Media Comments in Low-Resource Languages” [16]. The dataset and its
supplementary ﬁles are hosted in the Mendeley Data repository [17].
Each comment in the dataset is assessed regarding the sentiment by three researchers. Neutral comments are marked with 0, positive comments are marked with 1 and negative comments
are marked with 2. The comment with the most engagement has 287 impressions including likes
and emojis.

On average each news post in the National Institute of Public Health of Kosovo (NIPHK) Facebook site generated 59.25 comments. Table 2 shows examples of neutral, positive and negative
comments annotated by the researchers.


Table 1
Description of the attributes constituting the dataset.
Attribute


Table 2
Examples of neutral, positive and negative sentiments [2].
Comment (English translation)


Fig. 1. The daily trend of sentiments

Table 3
The number of comments for each sentiment class.


Fig. 2. Word cloud for words in the dataset

The opinions of the people have changed over time, and this can be observed from Fig. 1
that shows the daily trend of the sentiments. This ﬁgure illustrates that the number of comments increases continuously starting from dozens of them, when the ﬁrst cases of Covid-19
occurred and reached the peak during July. Then a noticeable decrease of the number of comments, in general, is shown during August. It should be noted that during all these dates the
neutral sentiment dominates, compared to the negative and positive ones.
The number of comments for each sentiment class and their respective percentages are given
in Table 3. The neutral comments dominate, whereas the positive comments are less represented.
The most frequent words in the dataset are shown in Fig. 2, generated by word cloud in
Python. Only words with 5 or more characters are included.
The ten most frequent words occurring in the dataset are presented in Table 4. As text processing features such as stemming and lemmatization are not supported by tools for processing
the Albanian language, then words with the same meaning can appear multiple times in different constructs (such as: raste - rastet, virus - virusi).
To assess the accuracy of the manually labeled data, we used a quality assurance method
called Annotation Redundancy with Targeted Quality Assurance [18]. Three annotators have annotated the same data samples independently and an inter-annotator disagreement is calculated
using Pearson correlation. Correlation values between the three annotators are shown in Table 5.
The annotators 1 and 3 have the strongest agreement with a correlation of 0.62.
In addition to Pearson correlation, we have calculated the reliability of the agreement between the annotators using Fleiss’s Kappa statistical measure.
Table 6 shows the ranks which determine the type of agreements between annotators. Fleiss’s
Kappa coeﬃcient for our three annotators is 0.60, which is considered a moderate agreement.
The number of comments in each sentiment class, distributed over months is shown in
Table 7. The maximum number of neutral and negative comments is reported in July. The highest number of positive comments is in May.


Fig. 3. Workﬂow process for the creation of the dataset.


2. Experimental Design, Materials and Methods
The workﬂow for creating the dataset is depicted in Fig. 3. The initial step is extraction of
the comments from Facebook using the Comment Exporter tool. The entry point of the Comment Exporter tool is the Facebook post URL, while the output is an Excel ﬁle containing all the
comments from the given post. In addition, the Excel ﬁle is enriched with four other attributes
and metadata related to the Facebook post.
In the second step, ﬁve other attributes related to the Covid-19 statistics are added by reading the content of the Facebook post. The third step entails the merge of all Excel ﬁles for
each Facebook post into a single Excel ﬁle. Next the aggregated data set has been processed
by anonymizing and removing duplicates as well as profanity language. During the ﬁfth step,
three researchers have independently assessed the sentiment of the comments in the dataset.
Assessment has been done using three sentiment polarities: positive, negative, and neutral. The
ﬁnal sentiment of each comment is assigned using a majority voting scheme. This step ﬁnalized
our dataset as a CSV ﬁle.
The dataset covers comments from a sole social media platform, i.e. Facebook, over severalmonths timespan. It could in the future be extended to contain comments from other social
media platforms like Twitter, Instagram, and so forth, spanning longer period of time. Future
research using the dataset presented in this article might extend to other domains like detecting
emotions or other multi-class text mining tasks (e.g., review of items in the scale 1 to 10) in the
Albanian Language.

Ethics Statements
Data has been collected according to the data owner terms of service. The dataset described
in this article is completely anonymized and does not contain any personal data, and thus we
are complying with the regulations provided by the platform owner. This project required that
we balance our research design with the protection of personal data while aiming to generate
new valuable knowledge for the greater societal good [19]. Consequently, we have chosen our
approach to protect the conﬁdentiality of the personal data completely and thoroughly, while
still leveraging the anonymised data for generating research results of a higher societal value.


Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships which have or could be perceived to have inﬂuenced the work reported in this article.
CRediT Author Statement
Fatbardh Kadriu: Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft; Doruntina Murtezaj: Software, Writing – original draft; Fatbardh Gashi: Software, Writing – original draft; Lule Ahmedi:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft; Arianit Kurti: Conceptualization, Validation, Writing – original draft; Zenun Kastrati: Conceptualization, Validation, Writing – original
draft, Supervision.

Acknowledgments
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at
doi:10.1016/j.dib.2022.108436.

