

DSAIL-Porini: Annotated camera trap image data of wildlife species from a conservancy in Kenya

Lorna Mugambi , Jason N. Kabi , Gabriel Kiarie ,Ciira wa Maina 

Centre for Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DSAIL), Dedan Kimathi University of Technology, Private
Bag-10143, Nyeri, Kenya

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Dedan Kimathi University of Technology, Private Bag-10143,
Nyeri, Kenya


Abstract:
For years, zoologists, ecologists, and researchers at large have
been using instruments such as camera traps in acquiring
images of wild animals non-intrusively for ecological research. The main reason behind ecological research is to increase the understanding of various interactions in ecosystems while providing supporting data and information. Due
to climate change and the destruction of animal habitats in
recent years, researchers have been conducting studies on
diminishing populations of various species of interest and
the effectiveness of habitat restoration practices. By collecting and examining wild animal image data, inferences such
as the health, breeding rate, and population of a particular species can be made. This paper presents an annotated
camera trap dataset, DSAIL-Porini1 , consisting of images of
wildlife species captured in a conservancy in Nyeri, Kenya.
6 wildlife species are captured in this dataset: impala, bushbuck, Sykes’ monkey, defassa waterbuck, common warthog,
and Burchell’s zebra. This dataset was collected using camera traps based on the Raspberry Pi 2, Raspberry Pi Zero,
and OpenMV Cam H7. It provides an example of images collected using relatively low-cost hardware platforms. The im-
age dataset can be used in training and testing object detection and classiﬁcation machine learning models.



The Speciﬁcations Table
Subject
Speciﬁc subject area: Environmental Science, Ecology, Images
Type of data: Images
How the data were acquired: The data were acquired using camera traps deployed in a wildlife conservancy
during the day. Annotation of the images was done including; species in an
image, the count, sex of the animals, and the coordinates of the camera trap
for each image captured.

Data format: raw, jpg
Description of data collection

Data source location:
Sensor: Passive infrared sensor (PIR)
Cameras used: Raspberry Pi camera, OpenMV Cam H7
Storage: MicroSD
Institution: Dedan Kimathi University of Technology
City/Town/Region: Nyeri
Country: Kenya
Latitude and longitude for collected samples/data: 0°23 26.0"S 36°57 43.7" E
Repository Name: DSAIL-Porini: Annotated camera trap images of wildlife
species from a conservancy in Kenya

Data identiﬁcation number: 10.17632/6mhrhn7rxc.6
Direct URL to data: https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/6mhrhn7rxc/6
The following GitHub repositories include all the code that was used to collect
the data:
https://github.com/DeKUT-DSAIL/cameratrap-pi.git
https://github.com/DeKUT- DSAIL/powering- raspberrypi.git
https://github.com/DeKUT-DSAIL/cameratrap-openmv.git

Value of the Data
• This dataset contains RGB images of 6 mammalian species found in Central Kenya. It contains sex-speciﬁc annotations for 3 species and counts for all species which can be used
to train and test computer vision-based wildlife censusing algorithms.
• The dataset is valuable for the ﬁeld of Computer Vision, especially for the tasks of image
classiﬁcation and object detection.
• The dataset serves as an example of how high-quality ecological data can be acquired
using low-cost and readily available hardware.
• The dataset can be used to test methodology to derive sex ratios and species distribution
range maps from camera trap data. This information is valuable to ecologists.



Fig. 1. Animal species found in Dedan Kimathi University’s Wildlife Conservancy: (a) defassa waterbuck, (b) Sykes monkey, (c) common warthog, (d) bushbuck, (e) Burchell’s zebra, (f) impala [4].

Table 1
The number of images in the dataset with species in the conservancy. These are images captured by the Raspberry Pi 2,
the Raspberry Pi Zero, and the OpenMV Cam H7 systems [4].

1. Data Description
Camera traps have been extensively used in the documentation and study of wildlife species
in areas of interest such as conservation reserves and national parks. They are attractive to ecologists because they allow non-intrusive data capture in the areas of interest. There are many examples of camera trap designs that have been utilized in recent projects including the Snapshot
Serengeti camera survey commissioned to expand the monitoring of lions by providing continuous data on lions and other prey during the day and night [1]. The Tanzanian Wildlife Research
Institute (TAWIRI) also used aerial photography to study herbivore populations [1] and recently,
the 2021 Kenya National Wildlife Census was conducted to record wildlife census in the country’s conservation area network [2].
This paper describes an annotated dataset of camera trap images collected at the Dedan Kimathi University Wildlife Conservancy (DeKUWC) in Kenya [3]. The data has six different species
of mammals found in the conservancy. These mammalian species include impalas, Burchell’s zebras, common warthogs, bushbucks, defassa waterbuck, and the Sykes’ monkey [3,4].
The dataset consists of 8524 images from the four camera traps deployed. Two camera traps
use the Raspberry Pi 2, one uses the Raspberry Pi Zero and the other uses the OpenMV Cam
H7 [4]. 7589 images are from the Raspberry Pi 2, 610 images are from the Raspberry Pi Zero,
and 325 images are from the OpenMV Cam H7 [4]. The images from the Raspberry Pi 2 and the
Raspberry Pi Zero have an image size of 1280 × 720 pixels while the images from the OpenMV
Cam H7 have a size of 640 × 480 pixels. All the images are in JPG format. Fig. 1 shows a sample
of the images captured in the conservancy using the devices mentioned. The dataset provides an
example of images captured using camera traps that can be fabricated by ecologists leveraging
low-cost hardware platforms such as the Raspberry Pi.
From Table 1, the species captured the most was the impala. The species captured the least
was the Sykes’ monkey. Due to factors such as the animal species being too far from the camera’s angular ﬁeld of view, animals covered by vegetation, or the presence of lens ﬂare caused
by the position of the camera relative to the incident sun rays, it was diﬃcult to determine the
species type in some of the images acquired.



Fig. 2. Examples of images from the dataset (a) In this image, we have three impalas. From the left: a female impala, a
male impala (with horns), and another female impala. (b) In this image, we have a zebra and a warthog [4].

1.1. Data annotation
The DSAIL-Porini dataset was manually annotated with the following ﬁelds:
1. Filename
This is the name an image ﬁle was saved as. The ﬁlename takes the timestamp form of YYMM-DD-H-M-S and contains the exact date and time it was taken and saved.
2. Species
This is the species identiﬁed in each image. Some images contained only one species. For
example, Fig. 2(a) contains only impalas. Other images had more than one species. For
example, Fig. 2(b) has two species, a zebra and a warthog. Some images also had more
than two species present. For the images with more than one or two species present, the
order of labeling was from foreground to background and left to right. In Fig. 2(b), ‘zebra’
appears ﬁrst in the species column because it appeared in the foreground and on the far
left compared to the warthog.
3. Count
This column contains the number of individuals per species in a particular image. With this
column, if there were more than one species in the preceding column, the order of the
count column followed the order of the species column.


Table 2
This table shows the corresponding annotation of the images in Fig. 2 [4].


4. Sex
This column contains the sex of each animal in a particular image. With this column, the
sex of the animals was labeled from left to right. Due to the lack of sex-revealing features with some animal species like the zebra and the warthogs, the sex column for these
species was ﬁlled with the “Can’t Tell” label. The impala has obvious features that enable
the differentiation between a male and a female. The male impala commonly referred
to as the impala ram has slender, lyre-shaped horns while the female impala commonly
referred to as the impala ewe does not have horns. Similarly, only male bushbucks and
waterbucks have horns.
5. Latitude and Longitude
These columns contain the coordinates of the location the camera trap was deployed at the
time the image was captured.
Fig. 2 shows two examples of images from the dataset while Table 2 shows the corresponding
annotation.
In Table 2 row a, there is an image captured using the Raspberry Pi 2-based camera trap. The
species present in this image is the impala and the number of impalas captured is 3. From the
left, there is a female impala, a male impala, and another female impala. The last 2 columns are
where the camera trap was deployed when the image was captured. In row b, there is another
image captured using the Raspberry Pi 2-based camera trap. The species present in this image
are the zebra and warthog. The number of zebras captured is 1 and the number of warthogs
captured is 1. From the left, there is a zebra and a warthog whose sex can’t be determined from
this particular image. The last 2 columns are where the camera trap was deployed when the
image was captured.
The data annotation is available on Mendeley Data as a .xlsx ﬁle. Images from the Raspberry
Pi 2 and Raspberry Pi Zero are saved in one folder, ‘RaspberryPi_images’. In this folder, there are
subfolders named in order of when the camera traps were deployed in the conservancy while
images from the OpenMV Cam H7 are saved in another folder, ‘OpenMV_images’.

1.2. Count and sex distribution analysis
In the dataset released, count analysis was important because it aided in learning the behavioral patterns of some animal species in a controlled natural habitat and helped in keeping
track of the species populations. From the images captured, some animals were mostly seen in
groups while others were solitary. At times the animals would be feeding or just walking. Fig. 3
shows a count analysis of the images with the bushbuck, impala, and common warthog species.
From the plot, the impalas are observed in groups ranging in size from one to ﬁve individuals
with four individuals being the most frequent group size. Similarly, warthogs were captured in
groups of up to seven individuals. In contrast, the bushbucks were mostly observed in isolation.
Sex distribution analysis is also important because seeing the male and female species interact and knowing their distribution can help determine future population sizes. Fig. 4 shows
the sex distribution of the bushbuck, impala, and waterbuck species. There are 1999 instances of
Male impalas and 6672 instances of female impalas captured in the dataset. Interestingly there
are more instances of male bushbucks than female bushbucks which can point to a male-skewed
sex ratio.

Fig. 3. Count of animals in each image containing the bushbuck, impala, and common warthog species.

Fig. 4. Sex distribution of the bushbuck, impala, and defassa waterbuck species.

Fig. 5. Hardware components of the Camera trap.


2. Experimental Design, Materials and Methods
The following sections describe the methods used to acquire these data.

2.1. Hardware & software
Raspberry Pi-based and OpenMV Cam H7-based camera traps were designed and developed
at DSAIL. The camera traps were also loaded with software to run them. The sections below
describe the two camera traps.
2.1.1. Raspberry Pi camera trap
Three of our camera traps use Raspberry Pi as the setup control. It is used to capture the
images, monitor battery voltage, and control the booting and shutting down of the system if
the rated cut-off voltage of the battery is reached or if the time set for shutting down has been
reached. To achieve this a power management board developed for an acoustic monitoring system shown in Fig. 5 is used. The board powers the Raspberry Pi autonomously giving it the
ability to shut down safely when the battery gets drained or when it is scheduled to shut down
and wakes up later when the battery gets charged or at the scheduled wake-up time [5,6].
Once the Passive Infrared (PIR) sensor is triggered, an image is captured and saved in the
micro-SD card. The program has a 2-second delay meaning it will wait 2 seconds before capturing another image even if the sensor is triggered. The captured images are saved with the
format YYYY-MM-DD-H-M-S, to help keep track of the exact time the image was captured.
All hardware was housed in a waterproof enclosure box and deployed in the wildlife conservancy. The camera traps were painted green to camouﬂage with the surrounding, as shown
in Fig. 6. There was a noticeable change after painting, and better quality images of animals,
especially waterbucks and zebras, were captured.


Fig. 6. The Camera trap in deployment. (a) Before painting (b) After painting.


2.1.2. OpenMV Cam H7 camera trap
The OpenMV Cam H7 is a relatively small low-power development board with a micro-SD
card socket. It has a powerful onboard 5MP camera and it can be programmed in Python. It is
used to run computer vision algorithms on what the OpenMV Cam H7 captures for areas like detection and color tracking. Other features are the ability to capture grayscale/RGB images/videos,
low power consumption while processing images, and the ability to track color blobs [7]. The
OpenMV Cam H7 camera trap captures images once a motion sensor is triggered.

2.2. Camera trap placement
The camera traps mentioned were deployed at different points in the conservancy.
Fig. 7 shows different parts of the conservancy where the camera traps have been deployed
for image data collection.
The decision to place the traps at these locations was informed by factors such as the location of the mineral supplements provided for the animals, paths leading to water points, areas
around water points, areas of interest pointed out by the wardens, paths leading to animal resting points and location of grazing areas.
A total of 30 deployments have been made at 18 different locations in the conservancy. During a deployment window, the camera traps take shots and store the images on SD cards. After
about a week, the camera traps are retrieved and the images are oﬄoaded to a computer for
annotation. The camera traps are then redeployed for data collection.


Ethics Statements
It does not apply to this dataset.

Funding
This work was funded by Data Science Africa through the Centre for Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DSAIL) program, Canada’s International Development Research Centre (IDRC),
and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) through the Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Development in Africa (AI4D Africa) program. We also thank Google for a research
award to DSAIL.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

Data Availability
DSAIL-Porini: Annotated camera trap images of wildlife species from a conservancy in Kenya
(Original data) (Mendeley Data).
CRediT Author Statement
Lorna Mugambi: Software, Data curation, Writing – original draft; Jason N. Kabi: Software,
Writing – review & editing; Gabriel Kiarie: Software, Writing – review & editing; Ciira wa
Maina: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to appreciate the team at Dedan Kimathi University’s Conservancy
who were instrumental in choosing locations for deploying the camera traps. Special thanks to
Kaindio Kimathi, a warden at the wildlife conservancy who helped validate the annotation of
the dataset.
